content/03.Introduction.md:3:Safarpour
content/03.Introduction.md:5:occurence
content/03.Introduction.md:5:occuring
content/03.Introduction.md:5:Yu
content/03.Introduction.md:9:allert
content/03.Introduction.md:9:IDOT
content/03.Introduction.md:13:CSV
content/03.Introduction.md:13:IDOT
content/03.Introduction.md:13:IDOT's
content/03.Introduction.md:21:APIs
content/03.Introduction.md:21:datasets
content/03.Introduction.md:21:datasets
content/03.Introduction.md:21:IDOT
content/03.Introduction.md:21:IDOT
content/03.Introduction.md:29:Unkown
content/03.Introduction.md:35:CSV
content/03.Introduction.md:35:datasets
content/03.Introduction.md:35:IDOT
content/03.Introduction.md:35:IDOT's
content/03.Introduction.md:37:idot
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:Abu
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:COVID
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:CSV
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:dataset
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:dataset
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:datasets
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:datasets
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:datasets
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:Grivna
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:IDOT
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:IDOT
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:IDOT
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:occurence
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:Yasin
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:3:Zidan
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:8:CSV
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:8:datasets
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:8:datasets
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:12:dataset
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:12:datasets
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:14:dataset
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:14:Hakkert
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:14:Hauer
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:14:inexistent
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:14:Quek
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:14:thats
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:28:englobes
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:54:dataset
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:54:hotspots
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:64:dataset
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:64:dataset
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:90:dataset
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:106:dataset
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:107:Cramer’s
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:107:Cramer’s
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:108:crosstab
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:109:CrashSeverity
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:109:dataset
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:113:CrashSeverity
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:115:CrashYr
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:116:CrashMonth
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:117:CrashDay
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:118:NumberOfVehicles
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:119:DayOfWeekCode
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:120:CrashHour
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:121:CollisionTypeCode
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:122:TotalFatals
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:123:TotalInjured
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:124:NoInjuries
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:125:CrashSeverity
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:126:IntersectionRelated
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:127:RoadwayFunctionalClassCode
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:128:WorkZoneRelated
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:129:TypeOfFirstCrash
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:130:CityName
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:131:ClassOfTrafficWay
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:133:TrafficControlDevice
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:134:TrafficControlDeviceCond
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:135:RoadSurfaceCond
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:136:RoadDefects
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:137:LightingCond
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:138:WeatherCond
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:140:ClassOfTrafficWay
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:140:IntersectionRelated
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:140:LightingCond
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:140:RoadDefects
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:140:RoadSurfaceCond
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:140:RoadwayFunctionClassCode
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:140:TotalFatals
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:140:TrafficControlDevice
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:140:TrafficControlDeviceCond
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:140:WeatherCond
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:140:WorkZoneRelated
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:141:Comapring
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:141:workzone
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:142:dataset
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:152:analized
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:152:meaningul
content/04.Exploratory Data Analysis.md:154:througout
content/05.Predictive Model.md:4:Abdulhafedh
content/05.Predictive Model.md:4:Rashidi
content/05.Predictive Model.md:6:Danesh
content/05.Predictive Model.md:6:dataset
content/05.Predictive Model.md:8:innacurate
content/05.Predictive Model.md:17:minize
content/90.back-matter.md:5:IDOTAdmin
content/90.back-matter.md:6:idot
content/90.back-matter.md:9:idot
content/90.back-matter.md:11:Khorasani
content/90.back-matter.md:11:Mohammadi
content/90.back-matter.md:11:Safarpour
content/90.back-matter.md:11:traumatology
content/90.back-matter.md:11:Zavareh
content/90.back-matter.md:15:Abu
content/90.back-matter.md:15:COVID
content/90.back-matter.md:15:Grivna
content/90.back-matter.md:15:Yasin
content/90.back-matter.md:15:Zidan
content/90.back-matter.md:17:Yu
content/90.back-matter.md:17:Zhang
content/90.back-matter.md:19:HAKKERT
content/90.back-matter.md:19:HAUER
content/90.back-matter.md:21:QUEK
