# Project selection and Introduction{.page_break_before}

Road accidents are responsible for a significant number of injuries reported every year. According to the World Health Organization (__WHO__), approximately 1.30 million people die each year as a result of road traffic crashes (as of June, 2022). In addition to this, the cost of road traffic crashes represent roughly 3% of a the gross domestic product (__GDP__) of a country (Safarpour et al, 2020; WHO, 2022). Consequently, a thourough understanding of what factors influence these accidents on roads is of utmost importance. However, it is not easy to decide which specific conditions lead to these accidents. Different road, climate, vehicle and driver conditions affect the likelihood of a road user to be involved in a fatal/serious car accident.

The ability of predicting accurately the potential occurence of a car crash is a valuable contribution for road safety. A common approach found in the literature, is the use of crash records data for the development of prediction models, so that agencies can allocate funds to priority areas within the roadway network. However, given that the available budget for infrastructure maintenance and rehabilitation is quite limited, the adoption of countermeasures for all the facilities where crashes are likely to occur is not feasible from an economic standpoint. Therefore, the ability of informing drivers about potential risks is an attractive way to proactively compensate the aforementioned limitations. Moreover, with the deployment of connected and autonomous vehicles (__CAV__), this information can be provided optimally helping vehicles with processes such as route selection, and can also deliver real-time alerts to instigate drivers to take the necessary safety precautions to operate their vehicles (Yu et al, 2021).

### Project Objective and Plan Proposal

The objective of this project is to use the extensive crash database collected by the Illinois Department of Transportation (__IDOT__), to explore, analize and extract trends from it to allow the development of a 
crash risk prediction model based on its main categorical data. Considering that this database will keep being fed and the previous entries can also be updated (such as the weather/lighting/pavement conditions), the predictive model could potentially be used by navigation systems to encourgae drivers to adopt more cautious behavior as soon as they enter high-crash risk sections of a given road. 

The plan to be carried out will follow the basic steps described as follows:

1. Read the IDOT's crash data CSV files available as an open data source.
2. Clean the data by deleting unwanted columns, handling missing data, and removing irrelevant observations.
3. Tidy the data by organizing the variables into columns and the observations into rows.
4. Analyze and visualize the data by finding correlations both analytically and graphically.
5. Model a prediction algorithm for crash risk according to categorical variables.

### Description of the Data Set

IDOT has generated datasets with statewide crash locations produced by the Crash Information Section of the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT). The accident data has been collected throughout the years using Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) that provided streaming traffic incident data. There are about 300,000 accident records per year in these datasets, and each record contains attributes that include conditions like (among others that are not listed or described here because these are not relevant for this study):

1. Time and date (day, month, year)
2. Coordinates (x,y)
3. Type of collision
4. A quantitative description of fatalities and injuries
5. Crash severity classification based on their impact on traffic 
6. The road surface condition (“Dry”, “Wet”, “Snow or slush”, “Ice”, or “Sand/Dirt/Mud”)
7. Road defects (“Debris on roadway”, “Rut/Holes”, “Unkown”, or “No defects”)
8. Lightning conditions (rated in a scale from 1 to 9)
9. Geometric characteristics of the road section
10. Work Zone (“construction”, “maintenance”, “utility”, “unknown”, or “N/A”)
11. Possible causes of the accident.

The datasets for different years are available for download as .CSV files at the IDOT's website:

[https://gis-idot.opendata.arcgis.com/search?groupIds=6d2862031a6d47c7a8c211e38e423e05]{.center}