# Exploratory Data Analysis {.page_break_before}

Open-source crash data is published by the Illinois Department of Transportation (__IDOT__) yearly. Each crash report was found to have extensive entries with up to 85 attributes, which include several independent variables to describe each crash occurence. Each dataset is filled out with observations according to the __IDOT__ Traffic Crash Report SR 1050 Instruction Manual (2019), in which each entry represents an observation. The dataset for each year is available online in .CSV format on the __IDOT__ website, and they contain observations arranged in rows and attributes organized in columns. The datasets from 2017, 2018, and 2019 were included in the Exploratory Data Analysis __(EDA)__. The datasets from 2020 and 2021 were discarded in this analysis due to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, which altered drastically the dynamics of traffic worldwide, and thus crash-related data (Yasin, Grivna & Abu-Zidan, 2021). Regarding the dataset size, each of them had originally over 300,000 entries (944,328 in total, once combined). The __EDA__ will be carried out following the steps described in the following sections.

## Reading Data

The selected datasets were imported to the widely-used Integrated Development Environment (__IDE__) and code editor __Visual Studio Code__ using its CSV library. It was found that the latest report (2019) contained the following 5 additional attributes that could not be used since it was not included in any of the previous reports.

1. Access Control
2. Flow Condition
3. Did Involve Secondary Crash?
4. Urban Rural
5. Toll

It was later verified that any other attribute was arranged in the same order for each of the datasets, thus it was decided to discard the aforementioned additional information for the sake of compatibility between the datasets. After deleting these attributes, all 03 datasets were merged into a unified file, which contains 80 variables (columns) and 944,328 observations (rows). This final database served as the initial point to start with the following step: the cleaning process.

## Cleaning Process

It was found that several independent variables would not provide fruitful information due to missing, unknown or incomplete data. First, this observation was obtained by visual inspection, and later by analyzing the number of different and unique values present in each of the attributes. Thus, the datasets were processed to filter out irrelevant or incomplete variables. For instance, information pertaining the location (latitude & longitude, or X & Y coordinates) has not been taken into account. A map plot was initially produced just to check that the entries corresponded to several locations within the state of Illinois, but no further use was needed. Columns containing codes describing the city, county or ID of the location where the crash took place have also been excluded. Columns involving duplicate information (e.g. two columns describing the same independent variable with a label and a number), and traffic structures were also removed. For few other independent variables, information that could potentially be useful was found to be significantly incomplete. For instance, this was the case of attributes such as the number of lanes and the type of intersection. As a consequence, these variables were not included in the clean dataset. Finally, additional cleaning was carried out for independent variables with a high number of description labels. For example, the "Railroad Crossing Number" variable contained around 100 different values which would have not been handy information for the end-user. After filtering out all the attributes that won't be utilized for this analysis, the number of independent variables went down from 80 to 24.

When it comes to crash reports, several inconsistencies are unfortunately frequent. In the literature, for instance, it is mentioned that "investigation of traffic safety by means of crash records is a reactive approach, where researchers need to deal with imprecise, incomplete, inconsistent, and, sometimes, inexistent records", and that is why the acquisition of historical series to provide minimal consistency to the analysis of crashes to reduce misinterpretations and misleading conclusions is crucial (Hauer & Hakkert, 1989; Chin & Quek, 1997; Farmer, 2003). This justifies the need of dedicating a considerable amount of time, after filtering the columns (variables) of interest, to the cleaning process of the rows (observations). For each column, any observation labeled as "blank", "unknown", or "other" needs to be handled, by either replacing the original value for a more meaningful lable or by deleting it. For all variables, the rows having "blank" observations were immediately removed from the dataset. 


## Analysis and Visualization

In this section, a set of plots, charts, and visuals were developed using the following tools:

1. Julia Programming Language.
2. Python Programming Language.
3. Microsoft Power BI.

The plots are presented here to display visually the findings and trends, as a product of the __EDA__. The visualization include distributions of vehicle crashes over time, and for the identified variables discussed in this section of the report. 

### Crash Data Distribution

A visual representation of the number of crashes throughout time can be seen in __Figure__ @fig:Figure_1. This served as a foundational step for the later-developed visuals. Here, the data is subdivided by year, and then by month to get a quick glance of the number of crashes throughout time (__Figures__ @fig:crash-2017, @fig:crash-2018, @fig:crash-2019).

![
**Distribution of crashes over time.**
IDOT's Crash Data from 2017, 2018 and 2019.
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973190/198916592-12348b8d-af9f-47f6-8bad-c0deb7819bec.jpeg "Figure_1"){#fig:Figure_1}


![
**Bar Plot Historical Crashes.**
Crash reports from 2017 in the state of Illinois, USA.
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112972950/206819370-0efde64b-d6eb-476e-b303-e1442ab71129.png "crash_2017"){#fig:crash-2017}

For 2017, the month with most incidents is December (“12”), with __28,032__ crashes (out of __295,651__ for that year), and the month with the least crashes is February (“2”), with __20,049__ incidents that month. These findings reflect the effect of weather conditions as well, given that during the very first and the last months of the year, the number of accidents increases. These months correspond to the winter season and englobes certain holidays where people might be very active and more accidents are likely to occur. The "_February effect_", as we would call it, where a decrease in the number of accidents can be observed, is not necessarily unexpected, because although it's still part of the winter, this is the month with the least number of days. 

![
**Bar Plot Historical Crashes.**
Crash reports from 2018 in the state of Illinois, USA.
]( https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112972950/206819722-8e5a50c1-7b7d-45ea-9aba-26c9208506d1.png "crash_2018"){#fig:crash-2018}

Now, for 2018, different from the previous year, the month with the largest count of crashes is November (“11”), with __28,743__ recorded crashes (out of __304,196__). The month with the least number of accidents is March (“3”), with __22,200__ crashes. For this year, just like for 2017, the months where peaks happen can be associated with the worst seasons for a driver (winter).

![
**Bar Plot Historical Crashes.**
Crash reports from 2019 in the state of Illinois, USA.
]( https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112972950/206819871-2e45d516-fdba-4246-bd35-f97ff6255b09.png "crash_2019"){#fig:crash-2019}

For the year 2019, the month with the most number of crash records is November (“11”), with __26,964__ recorded crashes (out of __283,946__), and the month with the least number of accidents is March (“3”), with __20,569__ incidents. in a similar way to the years 2017 and 2018, the months with the highest records belong to the same season. 


### Crash Data Location

The location data contained in the dataset was discarded for the modeling purposes. However, this can provide an idea about the distribution of the crash data over the state of Illinois, giving insights in terms of the nature of the data and potential contributing factors. Using the “X” and “Y” information present in the dataset, a visual distribution  of the recorded crashes is illustrated in Figure @fig:map-ihna. 

![
**Distribution of crash occurrences.**
Crash reports from 2017, 2018, and 2019 in the state of Illinois, USA.
]( https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/63623246/198847704-2128a33e-4ecb-4155-a802-e60878d1f137.png "Mapinha"){#fig:map-ihna height=3in}

In this figure, as in a heat map, the red regions represent clusters of points, where every point is defined by an “X” and “Y” coordinate. “X” and “Y” describe the longitude and latitude of the accident location. The majority of crashes appear to have happened in cities and towns (urban areas). The best example would be Chicago, where all around the area, the number of occurrences, or red dots, is significantly higher, which may be presumably because Chicago and the surrounding areas host a big fraction of the state’s population. On a smaller scale, this is also visible in other cities and towns, such as Springfield and Davenport. In other locations, the recorded crashes are much more spaced out, with certain “hotspots” in some highways and roads. 


### Categorical Data Distribution 

__Figure__ @fig:lightning-cond displays the different percentages of the different lighting conditions presented in the dataset. The condition with the most crashes associated with it is “Daylight”, representing 66% of the crashes in the dataset. This might be an effect of the traffic being more concentrated from early morning until evening. During the night time, “Darkness/Lighted Road” accounts for __18%__ of the crashes, and “Darkness”, for __11%__. Eaxh of the conditions “Dawn” and “Dusk” account for __2%__ of the recorded crashes.

![
**Distribution of accidents by Lighting Condition.**
From 2017 to 2019.
]( https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/63623246/205421301-110dc399-687a-4ca8-b450-bf81e6d44a6a.png "Light_cond"){#fig:lightning-cond height=3in}



The chart in __Figure__ @fig:surf-cond summarizes the analysis performed on the data on the influence of road surface conditions on the number of crashes. It was found that __76%__ of the recorded crashes correspond to a “dry” road surface, which can be thought of as the least dangerous condition. For the not-too-favorable road surface conditions, __16%__ of the crashes analyzed correspond to a “wet” road surface, __5%__ to “snow”, __2%__ to “ice” and other “unknown” road surface conditions. Again, this can be interpreted as a reflex of the fact that rainy/snowy days are less frequent than "dry" days. 

![
**Distribution of accidents by Road Surface Condition.**
From 2017 to 2019.
]( https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/63623246/205432303-cc25ce17-5dcc-4b15-9357-e50141640d80.png "surf-cond"){#fig:surf-cond height=3in}



When it comes to the distribution of crashes by road defects (__Figure__ @fig:road-excl), the vast majority of the occurences (__808,835__ out of __883,793__ observations, which accounts for __91.52%__) happened were “no defects” were present in the location. Given that a great number of crashes happened without any road defects, it might be interesting to account for the likelihood of road defects being associated with a car crash. By observing the different percentages of the road defects accounted for in the dataset, “unknown” represents __78%__ of the data, followed by 6% for “worn surfaces”, “debris on the roadway” and “other” road defects, and __2%__ for “ruts and holes” and “shoulder” defects. 

![
**Distribution of accidents by Road Defects,**
From 2017 to 2019, excluding "No Defects" condition.
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/63623246/205422935-755f8f5c-ade8-424e-833f-27aaf18c0e5c.png "road_def_excl"){#fig:road-excl height=3in}


### Correlation between Variables

As mentioned before, one of the objectives of analyzing this data is understanding how different road and environment conditions would affect crashes and their severity. This can be obtained by finding the associations between the different variables (columns) in the dataset, meaning how one variable is affected another variable. However, most of the variables are of categorical type, i.e., variables that are identified based on names or labels given to them and not based on numbers. This makes the built-in correlation functions in Python or Julia not helpful. One very commonly used method to measure the correlation between two categorical variables is Cramer’s V statistic. Cramer’s V is based on a nominal variation of Pearson’s Chi-Square Test. Like correlation, the output takes values between 0 and 1 (inclusive), with 0 corresponding to no association between the variables and 1 corresponding to one variable being completely determined by the other. On the other hand, and unlike the usual correlation, there are no negative values.
For this project, a function was created in Python that calculates the association between any 2 categorical columns using confusion matrix which can be obtained via built-in pandas method for categorical columns.

For this data that has 24 columns, running this function for every pair of variables would take a long time and may not give many insights. Therefore, the function was used to find how the column “CrashSeverity” is correlated with every other column. This column was chosen because finding how different conditions affect the severity of the crash is one of the most important outcomes of studying this dataset, and this would give an idea about the variables that have a significant impact on the crashes. The output is described in Table 1:

|        Parameter            | Association with CrashSeverity |       
|:----------------------------|:---------:|
| CrashYr                     | 0.008     |
| CrashMonth                  | 0.027     | 
| CrashDay                    | 0.005     |
| NumberOfVehicles            | 0.101     | 
| DayOfWeekCode               | 0.011     |
| CrashHour                   | 0.025     | 
| CollisionTypeCode           | 0.259     | 
| TotalFatals                 | 0.707     | 
| TotalInjured                | 0.706     | 
| NoInjuries                  | 0.356     | 
| CrashSeverity               | 1.000     | 
| IntersectionRelated         | 0.141     |
| RoadwayFunctionalClassCode  | 0.071     | 
| WorkZoneRelated             | 0.005     | 
| TypeOfFirstCrash            | 0.259     | 
| CityName                    | 0.074     | 
| ClassOfTrafficWay           | 0.061     | 
| Cause1                      | 0.166     | 
| TrafficControlDevice        | 0.098     |
| TrafficControlDeviceCond    | 0.052     | 
| RoadSurfaceCond             | 0.033     | 
| RoadDefects                 | 0.042     |
| LightingCond                | 0.028     | 
| WeatherCond                 | 0.031     | 

__Table 1__: Correlation table (association with "CrashSeverity"). 

From __Table 1__, it can be observed that the best-correlated factor in relation to crash severity is the "TotalFatals" column, which indicates the number of fatalities for each crash, with a value of 0.707. Similar observations can be made for the number of injuries. This makes sense because it is expected that the higher the severity of the crash, the higher the number of fatalities and injuries is expected to be. However, this is not very helpful for understanding how different conditions affect the severity of the crash. For this purpose, the columns that can be compared are: "IntersectionRelated", "RoadwayFunctionClassCode", "WorkZoneRelated", "ClassOfTrafficWay", "TrafficControlDevice", "TrafficControlDeviceCond", "RoadSurfaceCond", "RoadDefects", "LightingCond" and "WeatherCond". Comapring these, it can be seen that presence of intersections has the highest correlation with the severity of the crash followed by the traffic control device. In addition, the characteristics of the workzone seem to have the least correlation with the severity of the crash. This observation can be useful to understand the dataset and get an idea about which variables are important for making predictions. This was done to get a general idea about the data, but for performing predictions additional details should be considered.

### Trends

Given that not all the variables have to be present for a crash to occur, it can be seen that most accidents happen in the absence of adverse conditions. However, it should be taken into account that this reflects the fact that adverse conditions are exceptions, and accidents happen on a daily basis with other factors as underlying reasons such as the human behavior itself. However, adverse conditions do increase the likelihood of accidents and it can be observed an increase in the overall number of occurrences in specific hours (evening), days (weekends), and months (winter). The road type is also found to be directly correlated with the maximum speed limit, and as a consequence it is potentially tied to the number of accidents per day.


### Potential Issues for Modeling

As long as the number of entries containing a value for an independent variable overcomes by large any other value for the same independent variable, it can be expected that the analysis will potentially experience problems related to "imbalanced data", due to the uneven distribution of observations. Similarly, it can be seen that most of the independent variables are "classifications", and therefore their entries do not provide meaningul numerical values to be analyzed or correlated. For some of them, it is possible to replace the text values by boolean variables, but for some others a rating system may be needed if a numerical interpretation is required. It can be noticed that most of the attributes are subjective observations trying to describe the potential causes of a crash, and may be dependent on the observer itself. However, the casualties are a meaningful numerical observation that will be thoroughly used througout this report.
