## Introduction{.page_break_before}

Road accidents are responsible for a significant number of injuries reported every year. According to World Health Organization (WHO), approximately 1.3 million people die each year as a result of road traffic crashes (June, 2022). In addition, road traffic crashes cost countries 3% of their gross domestic product (WHO, 2022). Consequently, understanding what influences these accidents on roads is of utmost importance. However, it is not easy to decide which exact conditions lead to these accidents. Different road, climate, vehicle and driver conditions affect the likelihood of a driver to be in a fatal/serious accident.

The ability of predicting in an accurate way the potential occurence of crases is a valuable contribution for road safety. In an approach vastly used in the literature, crash records' data are used for the development of crash prediction models, so that agencies can allocate investments to priority areas of the roadway network. However, given that the budget for infrastructure improvements is limited, adopting countermeasures for all facilities that crashes are potentially occuring is not financially feasible. Therefore, informing drivers about the potential safety risks is a way to proactively compensate the aforementioned limitations. Moreover, with the development of connected and autonomous vehicles, this information can be provided in a more optimized way, contributing for vehicles' route decision, as well as for real-time alerts that can lead drivers to take the necessary precautions to operate more safely.

### Project Proposal and Objective

The objective of this work is to use the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) extensive crashes' data to be analyzed and, finally, be used for a crash risk prediction model based on main categorical data that can be real-time updated (such as the weather/lighting/pavement conditions). Ideally, it could be used by navigation systems to allert drivers to adopt more cautious behavior as soon as they enter higher-risk sections.

### Description of the Data Set

IDOT has generated datasets with statewide crash locations produced by the Crash Information Section of the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT). The accident data has been collected througout the years usign Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) that provided streaming traffic incident data. There are about 300,000 accident records per year in these datasets, and each record contains attributes that include conditions like (among others that are not listed and described because these are not relevant for this study):

1. Time and date (day, month, year)
2. Coordinates (x,y)
3. Type of collision
4. A quantitative description of fatalities and injuries
5. Crash severity classification based on their impact on traffic 
6. The road surface condition (“Dry”, “Wet”, “Snow or slush”, “Ice”, or “Sand/Dirt/Mud”)
7. Road defects (“Debris on roadway”, “Rut/Holes”, “Unkown”, or “No defects”)
8. Light conditions (rated in a scale from 1 to 9)
9. Geometric characteristics of the road section
10. Work Zone (“construction”, “maintenance”, “utility”, “unknown”, or “N/A”)
11. Possible causes of the accident.

The datasets for different years are available for downloan as a .CSV file in the IDOT's website:

[https://gis-idot.opendata.arcgis.com/search?groupIds=6d2862031a6d47c7a8c211e38e423e05]{.center}